Literary Terms
Set 1

Enjambment
in poetry, the continuation of a sentence or clause across a line break
Let me not to the marriage of true minds
Admit impediments. Love is not love
That alters when it alteration finds
Or bends with the remover to remove:
William Shakespeare, Sonnet 116

Polysyndeton
the repetition of the same conjunction, most commonly the word “and”
“There were frowzy fields, and cow-houses, and dunghills, and dustheaps, and ditches, and gardens, and summer-houses, and carpet-beating grounds, at the very door of the Railway.”
Charles Dickens, Dombey and Son

Asyndeton
the omission or absence of a conjunction between parts of a sentence
In some ways, he was this town at its best - strong, hard-driving, working feverishly, pushing, building, driven by ambitions so big they seemed Texas-boastful. In other ways, he was this city at its worst - arrogant, crude, conniving, ruthless, suspicious, intolerant.
Mike Royko

Internal Rhyme
the use of rhyming words in the same line, or rhyming words in the middle of lines from line to line
Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary,
Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore—
While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping,
As of some one gently rapping, rapping at my chamber door.
“’Tis some visitor,” I muttered, “tapping at my chamber door—

Edgar Allan Poe, “The Raven”

Slant/Imperfect Rhyme
words that share some sound but do not fully form a true rhyme

This little piggy went to market,
This little piggy stayed home,
This little piggy had roast beef,
This little piggy had none,
And this little piggy cried ‘wee wee wee’ all the way home.
Classic nursery rhyme

Pace
the relative speed by which the plot advances and  techniques which determine the appeal of the story for the audience
Factors may include, but are not limited to:
suspense
dialogue
diction
syntax
meter
rhyme

Consonance
in poetry or poetically styled prose, the repetition of consonant sounds in nearby words
"I'll swing by my ankles.
She'll cling to your knees.
As you hang by your nose,
From a high-up trapeze.
But just one thing, please,
As we float through the breeze,
Don't sneeze."
Shel Silverstein, “The Acrobats”

Assonance
in poetry or poetically styled prose, the repetition of vowel sounds in nearby words
I bomb atomically, Socrates' philosophies and hypotheses Can't define how I be dropping these mockeries 
Lyrically perform armed robbery 
Flee with the lottery, possibly they spotted me…
Wu-Tang Clan, “Triumph”

Blank Verse
verse in unrhymed iambic pentameter
Turning and turning in the widening gyre
The falcon cannot hear the falconer;
Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold;
Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world,
The blood-dimmed tide is loosed, and everywhere
The ceremony of innocence is drowned;
The best lack all conviction, while the worst
Are full of passionate intensity.
W.B. Yeats, “The Second Coming”

Free Verse
verse without a discernible meter or rhyme scheme

I celebrate myself, and sing myself,
And what I assume you shall assume,
For every atom belonging to me as good belongs to you.

I loafe and invite my soul,
I lean and loafe at my ease observing a spear of summer grass.

Walt Whitman, “Song of Myself”

Literary Terms
Set 2

Foil
an intentional pairing of characters for purposes of comparison and contrast in relation to characterization and/or theme
Draco Malfoy is a classic foil. Both Draco and Harry are wizards, but Malfoy’s lust for evil reinforces Harry’s determination to use his powers for good.

Hamartia
a flaw or defect in personality which leads to a character’s downfall; tragic flaw; fatal flaw
In the Back to the Future film series, Marty McFly gets himself into trouble several times due to his fatal flaw — the inability to walk away when someone suggests that he is too afraid to follow through. His unwillingness to be labeled a "chicken" is an instance of hamartia.

Chiasmus
a device in which two or more clauses are balanced against each other by the reversal of their structures in order to produce an artistic effect
On the night of May 10, 1941, with one of the last bombs of the last serious raid, our House of Commons was destroyed by the violence of the enemy, and we have now to consider whether we should build it up again, and how, and when. We shape our buildings, and afterwards our buildings shape us. 
Winston Churchill

In media res
the narration starts in the middle of the story, usually at a moment of high tension or interest, with the purpose of immediately engaging the audience; Latin for “into the middle”
Dante Alighieri’s The Divine Comedy starts the protagonist off in the middle of a dark wood with no explanation for how he got there or why. In doing so establishes emotional investment for the audience, who will continue to read in hopes that the   
        hero figures out how to escape his current predicament.

Catharsis
an emotional release, for character or the audience, where one has achieved a state of moral or spiritual renewal, or a state of liberation from anxiety and stress; a morally or spiritually cleansing moment

Pun
a play on words based on the similarity of sound between two words with different meanings
Of a girl, in white, between the lines, in the spaces where nothing is written. Her starched petticoats, giving him the slip. Loose lips, a telltale spot, where she was kissed, and told. Who would believe her, lying still between the sheets. The pillow cases, the dirty laundry laundered. Pillow talk-show on a leather couch, slips in and out of dreams. Without permission, slips out the door. A name adores a Freudian slip.
[Of A Girl, in White] by Harryette Mullen

Euphemism
a mild and polite expression used in place of a potentially offensive or uncomfortable topic
“If I pass during some nocturnal blackness, mothy and warm,
When the hedgehog travels furtively over the lawn,
One may say, “He strove that such innocent creatures should come to no harm,
But he could do little for them; and now he is gone.”
Thomas Hardy, “Afterwards”

Aposiopesis
a figure of speech in which the speaker or writer breaks off abruptly, and leaves the statement incomplete
“‘Well, I lay if I get hold of you I’ll--’

She did not finish, for by this time she was bending down and punching under the bed with the broom.”
Mark Twain, The Adventures of Tom Sawyer

Epiphany
a moment in the story where a character achieves realization after which events are seen through the prism of this new light
I’m your second father. You’re my son—more to me nor any son. I’ve put away money, only for you to spend. When I was a hired-out shepherd in a solitary hut, not seeing no faces but faces of sheep till I half-forgot wot men’s and women’s faces wos like, I see yourn. . . . I see you there a many times plain as ever I see you on them misty marshes. ‘Lord strike me dead!’ I says each time—and I goes out in the open air to say it under the open heavens—‘but wot, if I gets liberty and money, I’ll make that boy a gentleman!’ And I done it. 
Charles Dickens, Great Expectations

Repartee
a rapid-fire exchange of witty remarks, each speaker trying to score against each other in a verbal fencing match; an exchange of retorts

Literary Terms
Set 4

Metonymy
substituting the name of one object or idea for a closely associated object or idea 
The White House will be making an announcement around noon today.

Hollywood is only interested in rehashing tired old remakes these days. 

Synecdoche
a device which uses a part of something to represent the whole, or the whole signifies the part
“Take thy face hence.”
William Shakespeare, Macbeth

Trope
a common, overused, or derivative literary theme, device, or technique; typically used as a negative modifier in analysis and criticism that recognizes a lack of skillful application or originality

Parallelism
use of components in a sentence, line, paragraph, or stanza that are grammatically the same or similar in their construction, sound, meaning, or meter for various effects in purpose

Kenning
a two-word, or compound word, metaphor used to cleverly describe an object or idea
bone house = skeleton
whale road = the ocean
God’s beacon = sun
winter’s blanket = snow

Subtext
underlying (never directly stated) meanings of a work or part of a work of literature; requires the reader to carefully understand the unstated implications of what the characters are saying rather than just understanding their surface conversation

Hypophora
in which a writer raises a question and then immediately provides an answer
“What should young people do with their lives today? Many things, obviously. But the most daring thing is to create stable communities in which the terrible disease of loneliness can be cured.”
Kurt Vonnegut

Peripeteia
a reversal of fortune or sudden and unexpected change of circumstances
Oedipus was raised by different parents, for his parents feared the prophecy that he would kill his father and marry his mother. As an adult, Oedipus is told by an oracle that the plague on his people will end when the murderer of Laius is caught an exiled. Oedipus visits a prophet Tiresias who tells him he is the murderer. Believing he is innocent, Oedipus is angered. His wife, trying to calm him down, tells him of Laius’s murder. Oedipus, upon hearing the story, suspects he may have been the murderer. A messenger arrives to tell Oedipus his father Polybus has died. Oedipus rejoices that he has not murdered his father, but still fears he may marry his mother. The messenger, hoping to ease his fears, tells him Polybus and his wife were not his real parents. Rather than easing his fears, the messenger reveals the dark truth to Oedipus: he has fulfilled the prophecy. His good fortune is ruined and his stabs his own eyes out.

Cacophony
harsh, unmelodious, unpleasant combination of sounds or words
Beware the Jabberwock, my son!
The jaws that bite, the claws that catch!
Beware the Jubjub bird and shun
The frumious Bandersnatch!
Lewis Carroll, “The  Jabberwocky”

Euphony
combination of word sounds that create a pleasing and musical sound
Whose woods these are I think I know.
His house is in the village though;
He will not see me stopping here
To watch his woods fill up with snow.
Robert Frost, “Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening”

Literary Terms
Set 6

Epistolary
describes a work, or part of a work, of fiction through which the narrative is told through written letters, diaries, newspaper clippings, or other documents 

epistle = letter

Ad hominem
an argument attacking an individual’s character rather than his or her position on an issue
In Shakespeare’s Othello, Brabantio doubts Desdemona could have fallen in love with Othello through natural means. Thus, he questions Othello’s methods and character, guessing that Othello used magic and potions to make her fall in love with him.

Litotes
utilizing negative wording or terms to express a positive assertion or statement
MERCUTIO: No, 'tis not so deep as a well nor so wide as a
                       church-door, but 'tis enough, 'twill serve. 
from Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet

Parenthetical Observation
a brief moment that interrupts a narrative during which the character or the narrator reflects on a minor point that seizes his or her attention 

Does not require the parenthesis punctuation!
HAMLET: To the celestial and my soul’s idol, the most     
                  beautified Ophelia”—That’s an ill phrase, a vile 
                  phrase. “Beautified” is a vile phrase. But you shall 
                  hear. 
from Shakespeare’s Hamlet

Invective
when one attacks, insults, or denounces a person or thing through the use of abusive language and tone
ADRIANA: He is deformed, crooked, old and sere,
                     Ill-faced, worse bodied, shapeless everywhere;
                     Vicious, ungentle, foolish, blunt, unkind;
                     Stigmatical in making, worse in mind.
from Shakespeare’s Comedy of Errors

Epizeuxis
a form of repetition in which a word is repeated immediately for emphasis
“Simplicity, simplicity, simplicity! I say, let your affairs be as two or three, and not a hundred or a thousand; instead of a million count half a dozen, and keep your accounts on your thumb nail.”
Henry David Thoreau, “Walden”

Zeugma
a single word is used with two other parts of a sentence but must be understood differently in relation to each
She wanted to talk, but there seemed to be an embargo on every subject. At last she recollected that she had been traveling, and they talked of Matlock and Dove Dale with great perseverance. Yet time and her aunt moved slowly—and her patience and her ideas were nearly worn our before the tete-a-tete was over.
from Jane Austen’s Pride and Prejudice

Synesthesia/Synesthetic
a rhetorical device that describes or associates one sense in terms of another
And the hyacinth purple, and white, and blue,
Which flung from its bells a sweet peal anew
Of music so delicate, soft, and intense,
It was felt like an odour within the sense.
Percy Bysshe Shelley, “The Sensitive Plant”

Neologism
a newly-created word used in expressions, in both writing and speaking
KATHERINE: Pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes, 
                         that have been so bedazzled with the sun 
                         that everything I look on seemeth green.
from Shakespeare’s The Taming of the Shrew

Antimetabole
the repetition of words in successive clauses, but in transposed order
"Now, women forget all those things they don’t want to remember and remember everything they don’t want to forget. The dream is the truth. Then they act and do things accordingly."
Zora Neale Hurston’s Their Eyes Were Watching God

Literary Terms
Set 7

Didactic
writing that seems to overtly convince a reader of a particular moral, point, or lesson; intended to teach in a patronizing way; “preachy”

Tmesis
an insertion of a word between the parts of a word or compound word
Henry Bolingbroke: Intended or committed was this fault?
     If on the first, how heinous e'er it be,
     To win thy after-love I pardon thee.

William Shakespeare, Henry II

Tautology
needless repetition which adds no meaning or understanding
I need a new hot water heater
I’m going to the ATM machine
I know! I heard it with my own ears
She always over-exaggerates
We wrote a short summary
The school is in close proximity to 290

Colloquialism
the use of informal words, phrases, or even slang in a piece of writing, often as a part of depicting local dialects
The Widow Douglas, she took me for her son, and allowed she would sivilize me; but it was rough living in the house all the time, considering how dismal regular and decent the widow was in all her ways; and so when I couldn’t stand it no longer, I lit out.
Mark Twain, The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn

Double Entendre
a phrase or a figure of speech that might have multiple senses, interpretations, or two different meanings, or which might be understood in two different ways
Mrs. Slocombe: “Before we go any further, Mr. Rumbold, Miss Brahms and I would like to 
                               complain about the state of our drawers. They’re a positive disgrace.”
Mr. Rumbold: “Your what, Mrs. Slocombe?”
Mrs. Slocombe: “Our drawers. They’re sticking. And it’s always the same in damp weather.”
Mr. Rumbold: “Really…”
Mrs. Slocombe: “They sent a man who put beeswax on them, but that made them worse.”
Mr. Rumbold: “I’m not surprised.”
Miss Brahms: “I think they need sandpapering.”
Jeremy Lloyd and David Croft, Are You Being Served

Periphrasis
a purposeful use of longer sentences and obscure vocabulary to state something that could have been expressed in simpler terms

“‘Under the impression,’ said Mr. Micawber, ‘that your peregrinations in this metropolis have not as yet been extensive, and that you might have some difficulty in penetrating the arcana of the Modern Babylon in the direction of the City Road—in short,’ said Mr. Micawber, in another burst of confidence, ‘that you might lose yourself—I shall be happy to call this evening, and install you in the knowledge of the nearest way …'”
Charles Dickens, David Copperfield

Aestheticism
the elevation of taste and the pursuit of beauty as the chief principles in art and in life; a sub-cultural and artistic trend beginning in the late Victorian period

Apostrophe
a dramatic device in which the speaker directly, and
often emotionally, addresses a person who is dead
or absent, an imaginary or non-human entity, or a
place or abstract ideal
Lord: O monstrous beast! how like a swine he lies!
           Grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image!

William Shakespeare, Taming of the Shrew

Unreliable Narrator
a narrator of a work of fiction whose credibility is untrustworthy or compromised

this lack of credibility may not be immediately or unambiguously clear


Stream of Consciousness
a method of narration that describes happenings in the flow of thoughts in the minds of the characters;
an attempt to capture the narrative style of our interior thoughts rather than our spoken and written expressions 

Literary Terms
Set 8

Malapropism
incorrect words used in place of correct words with a similar sound; these can be unintentional or intentional
In this scene, Michael means to say “oaky AFTERTASTE”

Anaphora
the repetition of a word or phrase at the beginning of successive sentences, phrases, or clauses
It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness, it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity, it was the season of Light, it was the season of Darkness, it was the spring of hope, it was the winter of despair, we had everything before us, we had nothing before us, we were all going direct to Heaven, we were all going direct the other way—in short, the period was so far like the present period, that some of its noisiest authorities insisted on its being received, for good or for evil, in the superlative degree of comparison only.
Charles Dickens, A Tale of Two Cities

Epistrophe
the repetition of a word or phrase at the ends of successive sentences, phrases, or clauses
It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness, it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity, it was the season of Light, it was the season of Darkness, it was the spring of hope, it was the winter of despair, we had everything before us, we had nothing before us, we were all going direct to Heaven, we were all going direct the other way—in short, the period was so far like the present period, that some of its noisiest authorities insisted on its being received, for good or for evil, in the superlative degree of comparison only.
Charles Dickens, A Tale of Two Cities

Deuteragonist
the secondary character, right behind the protagonist in importance

Elegy
a form of poetry that typically reflects on death or loss

traditionally, an elegiac poem addresses themes of mourning, sorrow, and lamentation; however, such poems can also address redemption and solace
Nature's first green is gold,
Her hardest hue to hold.
Her early leaf's a flower;
But only so an hour.
Then leaf subsides to leaf,
So Eden sank to grief,
So dawn goes down to day
Nothing gold can stay.
“Nothing Gold Can Stay,” Robert Frost

Ode
formal, often ceremonious lyric poem that addresses and often celebrates a person, place, thing, or idea
The rose is a rose,
And was always a rose.
But the theory now goes
That the apple's a rose,
And the pear is, and so's
The plum, I suppose.
The dear only knows
What will next prove a rose.
You, of course, are a rose -
But were always a rose.
The Rose Family, Robert Frost

Epic
a long narrative in verse form that retells the heroic journey of a single person or a group of persons or events of cultural significance

Beowulf
Odyssey
Iliad

Ballad
a plot-driven song or poem with one or more characters unfurling events leading to a dramatic conclusion; often, a ballad does not tell the reader what’s happening, but rather shows the reader what’s happening, describing the events through narrative

Pastoral
an idealized portrayal of rural life and landscapes
